Title: New Project Kickoff
Date: 2015-02-13

I've got a new project on the horizon that I'm pretty excited about, and it's my intention to write about it here, hopefully as things develop, rather than all in one big burst at the end.  It's been a good while since I've done a hobby electronics project in earnest, and with all the cool projects that I'm seeing online these days, some of which are exploding into successful community funded projects, I figure it's about time I flex some of my engineering muscle in the direction of some _open source hardware._

Open Source Hardware
--------------------
I'm not going to talk technical details just yet because I haven't sorted much out, but contrary to some of my older projects, which are all theoretically "open source hardware" my intention for this design is to be open source in what I consider to be the truest sense of the word.  The OSS/OSH has grown substantially even over just the last decade, and today, it's simply not enough to declare a project as "open" and call it done.  Particularly in the hardware space, a completed design needs to be accompanied by adequate documentation and community engagement to have value in the open source community.  There are a _lot_ of great projects out there that do a fantastic job with their documentation, but there are many more that feel that sticking CAD files or a set of gerbers on an FTP site somewhere constitutes open sourcing the design.  It doesn't.  (But is a great start!) Am I dating myself by saying FTP site?  Gopher?  Anybody?

Tools, Techniques and the Open Source Model
-------------------------------------------
I think are a number of reasons that the open source hardware community doesn't have as streamlined an approach to releasing their designs as does the sofware community, and many of those reasons are good.  I am faced with many of them myself as I am preparing to start another project, and I find myself spending as much time fretting about ways around some of these difficulties as I do actually working on my designs.  Here's a short list of some of the difficulties that open source hardware projects face as they struggle to be as open as their software counterparts:

 **Hardware developers are newer to the open source model than their software counterparts**
 > Because software is conventionally more easily copied and distributed, it has lended itself natually to documentation and dissemination.  The migration of hardware design to computers over recent decades, along with improvements in the cost and availability of tools, storage, and bandwidth have made this less of an issue, but culturally, hardware developers are still getting their heads around what it means to open source a design, and what resources are available to them from a technical, documentary and legal perspective.
 
 **The availability of high quality open source tools for doing actual hardware design work is poor.**
 > This is a big one.  Open source software tools are of sufficient quality that many of the commercial software solutions that you can buy for software development, particularly in the embedded development space, are simply rebranded variants of open source software, provided with paid support from professional maintainers.  This is not true of serious hardware design tools, and the availability of such tools has been spotty at best.  This too is improving every day, and we're in a much better place now than we were even a few short years ago.  Increasinly the gap is closing for applications such as electronic design, 2D/3D CAD, and engineering simulation.  Closing, but not closed.
 
 **There is a confounding variety in the types of documentation required to adequately capture a hardware design.**
 > This is a big one.  When you write code, you (typically) have a wealth of tools available to document it.  Heck, if all else fails, the code itself is a form of documentation:  It is itself a complete description of its own function.  When you're designing hardware, though, the types of documentation required are manifold.  For electronics you have schematics, simulation files, measurements taken from prototype fixtures, PCB layouts, CAM files such as gerbers or OBD++ databases.  Mechanical designs vary widely in the type and format of the designs, and can range from drawings to solid models to 2D/3D cad files.  Test data, simulation and calulations invariably come with mechanical designs too, and are too varied even to list here.  All designs also include documents such as bills of materials, formal drawings and descriptive documentation, just to name a few. If you're managing a design that's actually going into mass production, you've got supplier information, assembly insturctions, programming guides and binaries, testing procedures, packaging, labeling, compliance documents.... the list goes on, and on, and on.  Making physical things can be a bit of an animal, and particularly for complex designs, it can get out of hand really quickly.  Even large well-staffed organizations have difficulty completely capturing their designs, and I personally have not seen it done completely in any organization, even in the most heavily regulated of markets, at least not the first time around.
 
 **Companies that make hardware components often do not subscribe to open source ideals.**  
 > Another big one. Frequently an OSH designer is faced with the challenge of keeping her designs open when her component suppliers make every effort to keep things proprietary.  The alternatives are to choose a different supplier of a particular hardware component (if available), try to use open source tools with closed source hardware (often dicey), or to make a compromise and disclaim the closed source components of the otherwise open source design.  This comes up more often than you'd think.  Microcontroller vendors often attempt to lock you into their closed-source compilers, or those provided by their strategic partners.  With microcontrollers, this is less an issue than it used to be, but in the programmable logic space, there are very few viable open source solutions that compete with vendor-supplied (closed-source) toolchains and IP for logic devices such as FPGAs and CPLDs.

It's not my intent here to be hard on the OSH community. Open source hardware has really blown up in the last 10 years or so, and we're seeing more and more designs that are better documented than ever before.  The list above is really just a list of challenges that I personally have encountered as I have considered open source hardware projects in recent memory.  Additionally, there's no need (in my view) to be heavy handed with the companies that keep things closed to protect their own IP.  As open-source designers, we can find that practice irksome, but companies do what they do to keep the lights on, and as long as they maintain reasonable ethics, I find it difficult to be too critical.

Looking Ahead
-------------
The nature of my upcoming project will be electronic, and my attempt will be to stick with open source tools in my effort.  This will slow me up a bit, as I have become complacent with my nice, professional tools, but learning means growth, so I am looking forward to learning and growing and posting my results here!
