Title: Thoughts on the Internet of Things 
Date: 2014-12-08 10:42 PM

Recently my work has taken a turn towards the trendy, I fear, and I'm finding myself increasingly awash in the problems of the [Internet of Things](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_of_Things).  I am an electronics engineer, and an engineering consultant in the automation and robotics discipline, so this turn was essentially inevitable.  The internet of things presents a number of rather singular difficulties that are simultaneously technically challenging and completely uninteresting to solve.  My thoughts on somany of these problems are far from congealed, but I hope I can provide some insight here as well as using this venue as a place to collect my own thoughts (and perhaps the thoughts of others?  I'm looking at you, *comments*)

The Internet of Things (IoT)
----------------------------
The internet of things is essentially the word that we use to describe our seemingly inexorable march towards a future where all of our electronic devices have internet connectivity.  This extends beyond the smart phones and set-top boxes of today, into the thermostats, appliances, and even clothing of tomorrow.  We've all seen this coming, and even today, a visit to Home Depot can fruit a dizzying array of cool internet-capable gadgets for everything from home climate control, to security, to entertainment, to toilet monitoring.

The Data Economy
----------------

The driving force behind the IoT revolution is of course the value of the data that these devices produce.  The data economy has shown us that more data allows companies to better target consumers, and better targeting of consumers means more sales, which means higher profits.  This isn't necessarily a bad thing.  As the "impedance match" between the consumer and the producer is improved, consumers get more of what they want, at a theoretically lower cost, as the producers use the data to produce better products and get them to the people that _really want them._

I realized recently that I haven't had cable television service since 2002.  That's twelve years with essentially no TV.  In the intervening time, the iphone, android, twitter, tumblr, youtube, netflix and countless other systems and services that have changed the way we consume information have been introduced.  The media and information landscape is essentially _unrecognizable_ to someone from 2002, and when I took a recent trip with my family to the mountains, and we spent some time watching TV together, I was completely confused and disoriented by the television commercials.  I don't mean this in the hoity-toity "oh we don't watch television" sort of way.  I consume a ton of "television" I just don't watch TV - I get my media through netflix, hulu, etc.  The confusion for me came from the way that this barrage of completely random advertisements was thrown at me every 10 minutes.  I found myself thinking "Why the hell am I seeing *this* ad?"  - Perfume, luxury cars, fast food.... all of these products that have absolutely no appeal to me at all were being blasted at me at full volume to absolutely no avail.  Was the TV at the mountain home broken??  Did I forget to log in? Why don't the advertisers know they should be trying to sell me maternity clothing for my wife, or capacitors for my latest project?

The IoT, while claiming to provide us unprecedented convenience and control over our lives, aims to improve the fidelity of silently-gathered information that our internet advertising overlords are already so famous (or infamous) for collecting.  As usual with technology, the sword cuts both ways.  The data that we produce from our new fleet of internet-connected devices is super valuable to companies that are interested in taking our money, but it's also super valuable to *us* 

What's in it for Me?
--------------------
We are here now, at the precipice of a world that is equal parts "infinite promise of human potential" and "ragged hellscape of senseless consumerism" because people who are *absolute dorks* brought us here.  As one of these dorks, let me tell you that we brought us here with the best of intentions.  I guarantee you that an internet connected egg carton doesn't exist because some corporate lackey in "big poultry" had a vision about improving his profit margins.  It exists because some nerd like me really liked egg salad, and was too absent minded to keep track of how many eggs were left in the fridge.  The data produced by our forthcoming fleet of devices is going to be completely awesome for all of us, and we need to be really careful to ensure that the data is collected, stored, analyzed, and shared sensibly.  We need to own that data, and have it work for us, rather than essentially giving it away, or trading it for less than it is worth.

Suggestions for the Future
--------------------------
As I am writing, I find that I have a great deal to discuss on this topic, and I think it unwise to try to squeeze it all into one sitting.  I'm going to wrap things up here, with a couple of my own suggestions for our IoT future:

 * Retention over the rights to our own data are paramount.  As valuable as data are to agencies concerned with our interests and whereabouts, it is more valuable still to we ourselves, who might use it to great effect in countless ways
 * A system of valuation for our data are necessary.  We need to assess the value of our data devise a way to make rational exchanges of our data for goods, services, or money
 * Free and open source technologies for aggregating, storing, and analyzing our data are sorely needed.  I have an OSS package for nearly every application I use today on my PC.  Why am I not using an OSS solution to analyze the data from my IoT thermostat?
 * The design of the modern internet is really _not suitable_ for the IoT future, and improvements will have to be made to improve privacy, security, and openness moving forward. (I will discuss this more later)
